[Amit Varma]: It's been 70 years since India became an independent country and my god what we've
[Amit Varma]: had to get through to get here. There were so many challenges that we faced, so many barriers
[Amit Varma]: that we needed to overcome to stay one united country. We were divided by language, ethnicity,
[Amit Varma]: religion and most of all, perhaps the deepest division of all, by caste. And now 70 years after
[Amit Varma]: we became independent, caste remains our greatest shame. Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host,
[Amit Varma]: Amit Badma. Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. Before we get into today's episode,
[Amit Varma]: a quick note from our sponsor this week. If you are a lover of art and want to get some into your
[Amit Varma]: home, head on over to IndianColors.com. Indian Colors is a company that licenses the work of
[Amit Varma]: top Indian artists and adapts it into objects of everyday use, including wearable art like stoles
[Amit Varma]: and kaftans, home decor like cushion covers and table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties and sales, just like authors do. The artists whose work you'll find
[Amit Varma]: here include luminaries like Dhruvi Acharya, Sameer Mondal, Vasvo x Vaxvo, Brinda Miller,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti Nelson, and my favorite, Harin Vakil. Do check it out at IndianColors.com, that's
[Amit Varma]: Colors with an OU, and use the code IVM20 for a 20% discount. Remember, IVM20 at IndianColors.com,
[Amit Varma]: Colors with an OU. Moving on. Today's episode is about the increasing caste tensions
[Amit Varma]: in modern India. When the republic was founded, our founders knew how great this challenge was.
[Amit Varma]: Babasaheb Ambedkar drafted the constitution after all. They had enlightened thoughts on what to do
[Amit Varma]: about caste. But caste has not only not gone away in modern India, it continues to be a huge cause
[Amit Varma]: of social strife. My guest today, Shruti Rajagopalan, is a constitutional economist who
[Amit Varma]: teaches economics at Purchase College in the State University of New York, and describes herself as
[Amit Varma]: quote, interested in the economic analysis of legal and political institutions, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: She has viewed caste conflicts in India through an economic lens, and I find her analysis of caste
[Amit Varma]: absolutely fascinating. Here's a conversation we had a few days ago.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Hi Amit, thanks for inviting me.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, it's been 70 years since independence. And I think one of the causes of our great shame
[Amit Varma]: is that we still haven't solved the biggest problem we started out with, which is caste.
[Amit Varma]: We were a country divided by many things. But most of all, I think you'd agree that it was
[Amit Varma]: caste that divided us and people came up with different solutions. You know, reservations
[Amit Varma]: were supposed to be part of the solution. There were others who believed that as we move towards
[Amit Varma]: prosperity, caste distinctions will automatically dissipate, urbanization will help. But more and
[Amit Varma]: more we find India is a country divided on lines of identity with caste being the biggest one of
[Amit Varma]: them. And, you know, I've heard you talk about the structural reasons behind this from an economist
[Guest]: point of view. So that's what I want to talk about today. Yeah, Amit. So I think you started off
[Guest]: identifying the problem correctly. India started out as a highly fractionalized society at the
[Guest]: birth of the republic along the lines of religion, caste, language, more than anything else. And yet
[Guest]: it is the caste fractionalization that has caused more tensions and has sort of been more exacerbated
[Guest]: over the last 70 years. And I think a large part of it is because of certain government policies.
[Guest]: So just to clarify, caste is not a government-created problem, but the last 70 years of
[Guest]: government policy, one with the economic structure of socialism, romanticizing villages and, you
[Guest]: know, some more specific stuff that we'll get to in a minute, I think government policies have
[Guest]: exacerbated the caste issue rather than solving it. So that's sort of the way I would think about
[Guest]: it. You also mentioned that I'm an economist and there is an economic point of view when you think
[Guest]: about caste. So let me just, you know, first of all, put it out there that of all the perverse
[Guest]: practices we have in India, caste is probably the very worst of them. I think it's appalling the way
[Guest]: we treat about 40% of our society. I think there is a high degree of upper caste elitism that is
[Guest]: unforgivable and unjust and should just not be accepted in modern day. Now, having said that,
[Guest]: and this is not apologizing for caste structures, but just merely explaining it, the caste system
[Guest]: has existed for a very long time. So I think first we need to acknowledge that it's not possible
[Guest]: to just undo it in a day or even in a couple of decades. It will take a long time to go away.
[Guest]: There are different kinds of caste practices that are problematic. The most important being
[Guest]: that you must follow the occupation that belongs to your family and you cannot easily switch out
[Guest]: of occupations. I think that's one of the worst. And then there are more or less benign versions
[Guest]: of it, which is in terms of the kind of food you eat or, you know, marriage endogamy, which
[Guest]: is quite an awful idea, but it's also difficult to regulate people and rather wrong to regulate
[Guest]: who people marry. So there are certain caste practices that are going to be more entrenched,
[Guest]: are going to take longer, are going to be more persistent. And there are certain caste practices,
[Guest]: such as those in the labor market, which really should have gone away, which haven't yet gone away.
[Guest]: So thinking about this from that point of view, I would first say that if you think about this as
[Guest]: any reasonable human being who believes in liberty and justice, a liberal society is where each
[Guest]: individual gets to make a choice about the type of individual they wish to become. So the caste
[Guest]: system is illiberal at its very core, no matter which way you slice it. The fact that no group
[Guest]: is given a choice and some groups are superior to others, and that at birth, your entire life,
[Guest]: your habits, your occupation, who you marry, everything is set out for you and you have no
[Guest]: choice in those decisions, is a fundamentally illiberal society, right? Now that's the liberty
[Guest]: and justice problem. What is the economic problem? If you think about liberal markets,
[Guest]: or rather a market economy, the core idea is that resources go to the highest valued use
[Guest]: in a functional economy. The caste system shackles human capital, right? So the caste system is an
[Guest]: extremely market unfriendly structure, which actually interferes with the functioning of the
[Guest]: functioning of the market. Now what do I mean by shackles human capital? Now think of Ambedkar. He
[Guest]: was born in the Mahar community within the caste system. He was predestined to follow some menial
[Guest]: occupation in the village. The highest he could have risen to, which his family did rise to at
[Guest]: that point in time, was to join the British military, which also had its caste segregation
[Guest]: problems, but they at least got out of the village parochial caste system. So that's about the best
[Guest]: he could have done given those caste structures. And look at what Ambedkar did. His highest valued
[Guest]: use was not to be a gopher in the village, in the back streets of a village carrying filth around.
[Guest]: His highest valued use is to write the Indian constitution and literally give birth to the
[Guest]: republic. Now the caste system interferes in this process. So this is a really big problem. If
[Guest]: resources cannot go to their highest valued use, how many Ambedkars are existing in India who are
[Guest]: completely invisible, who could make their life better, who could make Indian society so much
[Guest]: better and cannot because they are trapped in a particular structure where elites control
[Guest]: all their choices. So that is the problem of the caste system, if you think of it from the
[Guest]: point of view of human capital in a market economy and the movement of human capital
[Amit Varma]: in the market economy. Now that identifies a problem and this problem is something which
[Amit Varma]: was identified and prioritized by our founders in a sense. Ambedkar himself was one of the
[Amit Varma]: framers of the constitution. What are the mistakes we've made in framing the solutions to this
[Guest]: problem? So I would say again, like I mentioned before, government didn't create the caste
[Guest]: system, but there are certain economic policies that followed that certainly exacerbated the
[Guest]: caste system. And I think I can definitely identify four specific sort of problematic
[Guest]: areas with the government. The first two are quite simple and along the lines of what we've
[Guest]: been discussing. That is the restrictions that the state places on the movement of physical
[Guest]: capital, especially agricultural physical capital in India. And the second is the restrictions on
[Guest]: movement of human capital. So let me elaborate on both of them. Now when it comes to physical
[Guest]: capital, the idea is that physical capital also goes to its highest valued use and is not trapped
[Guest]: in the hands of the human capital, which is also shackled. So for instance, if you think of the
[Guest]: existing caste divisions, you know, blacksmith uses blacksmith tools, upper castes have are
[Guest]: landowning and engage in farming and so on and so forth, right? Now in a market society, the
[Guest]: best person to be a blacksmith should be the person using the blacksmith tools. And the best
[Guest]: farmer should have that agricultural land. We don't have that system simply because of the
[Guest]: number of restrictions that are imposed on how property will switch hands. So you've already
[Guest]: done a couple of podcasts with some of our wonderful friends on the restrictions in
[Guest]: agriculture, most importantly on land use in agriculture. Most states don't allow farmers to
[Guest]: sell to non-farmers. There is a lot of bureaucracy that is involved in converting land from
[Guest]: agricultural use into other uses. This essentially means that the landowning class cannot exit that
[Guest]: system very easily, even if they wish to be engaged in some other activity. Now this is
[Guest]: obviously mostly upper castes, but caste system does shackle everybody to a certain extent,
[Guest]: right? And this is an example of how it might shackle relatively well off upper castes. If you
[Guest]: look at the kind of protests that are taking place in India today with the partidars in Gujarat,
[Guest]: or Kapus in Andhra Pradesh, one of the really big problems is these are landowning groups,
[Guest]: and their land is not as productive anymore. And it's not very easy to exit agriculture
[Guest]: the way it was in other countries when they were going through the transition of
[Guest]: low agricultural productivity or improvements in agricultural productivity. So then it took fewer
[Guest]: people to engage in agriculture. So now we have a situation where even upper castes agitate.
[Guest]: Now imagine this also in terms of lower caste groups. If you think of villages and the way
[Guest]: villages are built, they are highly segregated, right? No caste group can just earn more money
[Guest]: and make a bigger home or a bigger mansion, or try and get access to better public goods and
[Guest]: services. This is directly related to how do we zone these areas? How do we manage land use?
[Guest]: And how do we easily convert land use from one type of use to another type of use
[Guest]: for free movement of physical capital? So sometimes physical capital doesn't have to
[Guest]: literally move like tools. It can move in terms of the resource that it provides to society.
[Guest]: So the land can stay in the same place and move from agricultural use to something completely
[Guest]: different and far more productive. And we don't allow that, making the caste problem worse in
[Guest]: the sense that it shackles people to what they were supposed to be at birth, which is determined
[Guest]: by caste in India and pretty much nothing else. Now the problem gets worse when you talk about
[Guest]: shackling of people's human capital. If you're the son of a farmer and destined to be a farmer,
[Guest]: or if you're the son of a potter and destined to be a potter, then the village structure is
[Guest]: extremely problematic when it comes to you moving to your highest valued use. There was no
[Guest]: constitution to be drafted in Ambedkar's village. Ambedkar had to leave. So now how do we figure
[Guest]: out a process by which groups that are not happy, and this is mostly lower caste groups because of
[Guest]: decades and centuries of oppression, but also in some cases upper caste groups who are shackled
[Guest]: in their particular occupation, how do they leave? You mostly leave in the stages of development that
[Guest]: India is in presently. You usually leave when there is industrialization and cities become
[Guest]: bigger, towns become bigger, and manufacturing units start demanding more workers. Now what
[Guest]: has happened in India with its horrific labor law setup is that India has made it extremely
[Guest]: difficult for its entrepreneurs to hire labor and to hire labor formally. So what happens is
[Guest]: labor is hired informally. We don't have very good estimates, but we know that the informal
[Guest]: share of the labor market is way bigger than the formal share. Some people say twice as big,
[Guest]: some people say three times as big. So we know it's a very, very large group. So how do you
[Guest]: think about that? People are not easily able to leave their existing job if they can't have an
[Guest]: assurance that they will easily get a new job. So if you're a blacksmith in a village or a porter
[Guest]: in a village and it's not very productive and your village is a hellhole when it comes to caste
[Guest]: structures, it's not easy for you to leave because no one will hire you and no one will hire you
[Guest]: because the state has made it extremely difficult to hire people and skill them. This is a really
[Guest]: big problem. So labor law reform, when we think about it outside of the caste system, what we
[Guest]: mean is that labor should be easily able to move from one kind of unit to another kind of unit.
[Guest]: In other words, when an industry is booming and demanding more labor and human capital,
[Guest]: it should be able to freely flow to that industry and dying businesses that are not profitable,
[Guest]: that are not using resources to their highest value of use, should be allowed to close.
[Guest]: That's not the case in India. So labor is not able to move freely. So even without the parochial
[Guest]: caste system, we've created a new caste system in India with our existing labor framework
[Guest]: because people are stuck in the jobs that they get. It's very difficult to switch jobs and it's
[Guest]: very difficult to close industries and start new ones. Now add caste to this problem, you get a
[Guest]: particular situation where for each formal job there are 10 people applying for it. So of course
[Guest]: the person who is choosing among those applications can discriminate more easily based on his existing
[Guest]: caste prejudice. So prejudice is much more easy to exercise when there is artificial shortages that
[Guest]: are created. We've created an artificial shortage and now anyone in the formal economy who is doing
[Guest]: the choosing can impose all their prejudices in that process. So I just wanted to clarify. So
[Amit Varma]: essentially what you're saying is that because there is a scarcity of formal jobs, there is far
[Amit Varma]: greater demand for them than the supply and the people who are in power can then will just choose
[Guest]: the guy from his village or his caste or whatever. I think that's the second part of what I'm saying.
[Guest]: The first part of what I'm saying is that it's very difficult for someone to leave their
[Guest]: predestined caste allotted occupation in the first place because it's very difficult to transition
[Guest]: from one sector of the economy to other sectors of the economy in India because it is so difficult
[Amit Varma]: to hire and fire labor. Yeah, I was getting to that. So one, you have the existing caste
[Amit Varma]: imbalances perpetuating themselves and other, you have fewer people like someone trapped as a
[Amit Varma]: potter in a village or a blacksmith or whatever, you have fewer of them willing to actually make
[Amit Varma]: the move towards cities because most of the jobs available will be informal jobs with no
[Amit Varma]: guarantees of security and, you know, less chances of upskilling and so on. Absolutely.
[Guest]: And there is a third aspect to that problem. The more informal the labor market, the more you need
[Guest]: to rely on pre-existing networks, which in India is mostly based on religion, language and caste.
[Guest]: So let's say that a potter is extremely entrepreneurial and actually manages to
[Guest]: break out of the parochial village system. When he reaches the city, the only network he can reach
[Guest]: out to is the existing caste network because no one else will accept him, right? Now, that is an
[Guest]: old problem. But why does he need that network? He needs it to survive because he's part of an
[Guest]: extremely uncertain and vulnerable in the informal sector of the economy. He can't get a formal job
[Guest]: in the process. The people who look after him are his caste community. So we are sort of
[Guest]: perpetuating, because of the informal market structure, we are perpetuating village parochialism
[Amit Varma]: and it's sort of entering urban areas. And this is very interesting to me because normally when
[Amit Varma]: we talk about these subjects like labor laws, like not being able to sell agricultural land
[Amit Varma]: for non-agricultural purposes, we talk of them in the context of how, you know, the lack of
[Amit Varma]: economic freedom can get in the way of prosperity, you know, economic freedom leading to prosperity.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're pointing out here is that it's not just about economics, they actually exacerbate
[Guest]: social divisions by reducing mobility. Absolutely. And to me, honestly, I know that the
[Guest]: traditional way to think about caste is hegemonic power structures. And there's a lot of merit in
[Guest]: that. And I'm very interested in that literature. But to me, the caste system is entirely about
[Guest]: economic freedom. Right. So if you, we have robbed the entire country, especially the most
[Guest]: oppressed groups of their economic freedom. So that's how I think about caste. I don't think
[Guest]: of it as, oh, there's economic freedom plus plus something else. This is a problem that is caused
[Guest]: by robbing people of their economic choices. And it has obviously gotten worse because we have
[Guest]: entrenched the practice over centuries. And, you know, those things are very hard to get out of
[Amit Varma]: because they persist so much. And in fact, people often sort of
[Amit Varma]: give economic freedom a bad name by making fun of trickle down economics. But as I keep pointing
[Amit Varma]: out, economic freedom actually leads to trickle up economics. So benefits go first to the bottom.
[Amit Varma]: And that's clearly not just in an economic sense in terms of money, but also in a social sense,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of empowering people by giving them the mobility to move to a better life.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Whether you call this an economic choice, a social choice, a caste choice,
[Guest]: the fundamental point is when you restrict either through the caste system or by the government,
[Guest]: when you restrict people's choices, you get illiberal societies and oppression.
[Guest]: When you remove those restrictions, you get liberal societies and prosperity.
[Guest]: We have seen this happen time and again. If you read economic history,
[Guest]: there is an additional caste element which makes India a more complex and interesting place.
[Guest]: But at the core of it, it is an economic freedom argument. It is a, I, as an individual,
[Guest]: should be allowed to make my choices. And the caste system doesn't allow that because it has
[Guest]: pre-allotted pretty much my entire life from my occupation to my diet to the girl or the boy I'm
[Guest]: going to marry, how many kids I'm going to have, what language they will speak. Everything has
[Guest]: been set out for me at birth, and it's impossible to get out of it.
[Amit Varma]: So these are your first...
[Guest]: I was sort of going to follow you. These were the first two aspects which made the problem worse.
[Guest]: I want to address two more, which are a little more complicated. So the third is India has not
[Guest]: done a very good job of embracing policies that slowly and organically allow villages to transform
[Guest]: themselves. Right? I know in India, there is a lot of romance about villages and village
[Guest]: structures. A lot of this nonsense comes from the Gandhian idea of villages as self-sufficient
[Guest]: republics. But the reality of it is villages are cesspools of caste prejudice and horror in India.
[Guest]: Right? They are segregated. Every village you go to is basically a segregated town based on caste.
[Guest]: It looks like it is based on economic prosperity and wealth, but at the core of it, it's caste,
[Guest]: because if low caste members actually made the money, no upper caste member would allow them to
[Guest]: build a mansion on their street. So villages segregate themselves. Now think of the problems
[Guest]: attached to this. All the public goods in a village and quasi-public goods are also segregated
[Guest]: in their use. So we, living in cities, we read stories like a Dalit person beaten for using
[Guest]: Brahmin wealth or something horrible like that. That's a public good allocation problem. Right?
[Guest]: And the public good allocation problem comes out of the fact that villages are segregated units.
[Guest]: Now, what do we need to solve this problem? We need to make villages transform out of their
[Guest]: current structure into a new structure. The way India is growing, both in terms of population
[Guest]: and in terms of economic growth, villages should naturally transform into small towns
[Guest]: and then slightly bigger towns and then a small city and then big metropolitan areas.
[Guest]: If you think about it, we have the same metropolitan areas in India that we had during
[Guest]: colonial regime. They set it up. We don't have too many villages transforming into urban centers.
[Guest]: We have pre-existing urban centers transforming into bigger urban centers. Why is that? Because
[Guest]: we have put in village governments and levels of village governments which are not easy to transform
[Guest]: from one form to another form. So what I was talking about previously when it came to land
[Guest]: use restrictions and human capital restrictions, now apply that to public goods restrictions.
[Guest]: Right? Local governance is a public good that's provided by the state and the state has made it
[Guest]: impossible to transform one kind of governance system into another kind of governance system.
[Guest]: Instead, what it's done is it has reinforced an old parochial kind of government which is
[Guest]: a panchayati raj institution with a twist of reservations. Right? But that doesn't solve
[Guest]: the problem of how public goods are determined and allocated and how we get out of the village
[Guest]: segregation system. So there is a heartbreaking piece. I mean, not just heartbreaking, it makes
[Guest]: you furious. Have you read a short essay by Ambedkar called No Pune, No Water?
[Amit Varma]: No, I haven't.
[Guest]: Okay, it will make you upset and very mad. And this is not just because of my love for Ambedkar,
[Guest]: but Ambedkar was, as you know, he belonged to the Maha community, which is one of the
[Guest]: untouchable groups at the time. He was an exceptional student who went and excelled
[Guest]: in his school activities. But there were times when he wasn't allowed to sit inside a classroom.
[Guest]: He had to sit outside a classroom and because they would pollute the environment, he had to
[Guest]: carry like a gunny bag, you know, those round jute sacks. He would have to carry his own sack
[Guest]: and come and sit outside the classroom to learn and leave. One of the bigger problems was access
[Guest]: to water. Upper caste won't touch water that is used by lower caste. So there would be a pune
[Guest]: who would show up and pour water from about four feet above him so that he does not touch
[Guest]: Ambedkar or anyone of that caste. And that's how Ambedkar would get access to water. If the pune
[Guest]: didn't show up that day to school, Ambedkar had to go without water that day if he chose to learn.
[Guest]: Right? This is horrific. The fact that Ambedkar did what he did is exceptional.
[Guest]: We're all grateful he got to write about it and we get to read about it.
[Guest]: What is horrific is this carries on till present day times. And according to me,
[Guest]: the only way to break out of the system is to leave the village stronghold. In a village,
[Guest]: everyone knows everyone. Everyone knows everyone's grandparents, their caste, their, you know,
[Guest]: family secrets, occupations. There is a very clear power structure between families which
[Guest]: was predetermined by caste. Sometimes the only way to fix that problem is to exit it.
[Guest]: Right? And villages don't allow easy exit for two, three reasons. One, the governance structure
[Guest]: is not allowed to change. So villages can't transform themselves. And we have too few
[Guest]: urban areas which are extremely unkind to strangers when they first show up. So it's very daunting
[Guest]: it's very daunting for someone who is being treated like Ambedkar when it comes to
[Guest]: water access to leave the village and actually go to the city where you don't know anyone.
[Guest]: And cities are not very good areas where strangers can just show up and get a job.
[Guest]: Can I interrupt you for a second and ask you to elaborate on,
[Amit Varma]: can I ask you to elaborate on what you mean by governance structures not being allowed to change?
[Guest]: So mainly panchayati raj institutions, right? What we have done is we have two levels of local
[Guest]: government. And if you remember, we did a podcast on one of them, which was the urban local bodies.
[Guest]: When we talked about fiscal federalism and their revenue raising authority,
[Guest]: their village counterpart is the panchayati raj institution.
[Guest]: Now, if you think about this like an economist, the way economic growth takes place,
[Guest]: villages should automatically convert themselves into smaller towns, bigger towns, bigger cities,
[Guest]: right? Which means panchayati raj institutions should slowly be able to transform into urban
[Guest]: local bodies. The 73rd and 74th amendment have no provision to convert a panchayati raj government
[Guest]: into an urban government. So does that mean that when a village gets bigger and it reaches
[Amit Varma]: town size, it is still by law forced to remain with a structure of governance that is more suitable?
[Guest]: Exactly, exactly. And more suitable for a village that Gandhi imagined, not Ambedkar imagined,
[Guest]: may I add, right? Low castes have no great romance to do with village structures in a way that high
[Guest]: castes do, because low castes can't get water unless the high caste fume shows up. So there's
[Guest]: a reason for this romance with village structures. We must point out that it's not the lower castes
[Guest]: who have this romance. It's the upper castes who, by the way, don't even live in villages.
[Guest]: And now these groups, mostly upper castes, have written into law structures, written into the
[Guest]: constitution, structures that cannot easily transform from one kind of governance need
[Guest]: to another kind of governance need. In fact, there is no way, there is no provision to change
[Guest]: from a panchayati raj institution into an urban local body. They fundamentally do the same thing,
[Guest]: which is local governance, but their scope of operation is actually quite different. The way
[Guest]: they are elected is quite different. So this is a very big problem. This is not just a problem
[Guest]: from a caste point of view. It's a problem from a growth point of view, but it certainly
[Guest]: exacerbates the caste problem because it keeps the village structure alive. And I think the
[Guest]: Indian village structure just needs to go. There is just nothing valuable in it to protect it.
[Amit Varma]: This village structure is the kind of injustice that it has perpetuated.
[Amit Varma]: And this village structure you're saying is reflected in the panchayati raj system.
[Guest]: That's why it's a problem, right? Yes, absolutely. The only thing that is
[Guest]: interesting about the new panchayati raj system versus the old is that the old one was all upper
[Guest]: caste men. The new twist to the panchayati raj system is that there are some reservation for
[Guest]: lower caste groups and for women. That's literally the only twist, right? But even think about it,
[Guest]: even with those reservations and things like that, they keep that segregation alive in a village.
[Guest]: The village is too small a structure to forget, right? And what does it need to forget? It needs
[Guest]: to forget people's past or what they think is people's predestined future. The village structure
[Guest]: in itself is not able to do that. It's too few people, very persistent and entrenched institutions,
[Guest]: culturally, linguistically, in terms of caste. You can't get rid of those problems without getting
[Guest]: rid of the village structure. So how do we get rid of the village structure? Make it easier for
[Guest]: villages to transform or make it easier for people to leave the village. We haven't done either very
[Amit Varma]: well. Right. So that's reason number three that our bad policies keep people trapped in villages
[Amit Varma]: partly by fixing the structure of government to what is an archaic structure of the panchayati
[Amit Varma]: raj which encodes the existing social inequalities within itself.
[Guest]: Okay, so the fourth point that I want to get to is a little bit controversial. This is the whole
[Guest]: reservation system in India, right? We have what I like to dub constitutionalized caste.
[Guest]: And what I mean by that is we have read into constitutional protections and exceptions to
[Guest]: constitutional protections, certain reservations or, you know, secured positions for certain caste
[Guest]: groups. And that, according to me, has made the caste problem worse. Okay. Now, at the time of
[Guest]: independence, there was a need for upliftment of certain castes. We can debate what was the
[Guest]: better system of upliftment, but we came down to caste reservations. That is what was chosen.
[Guest]: Now, having said that, everyone, including Ambedkar, who was a champion of this,
[Guest]: felt that we won't need it for too long, right? There are certain provisions in the constitution
[Guest]: that were supposed to lapse. They were sunset clauses that are supposed to lapse every 10
[Guest]: years unless it's extended. And every 10 years, there's a constitutional amendment to extend those
[Guest]: protections. So what has happened is that unlike what Ambedkar imagined, the caste problem has
[Guest]: persisted for 70 years and it has actually gotten worse. So now let me try and unpack this. Now,
[Guest]: I fully understand that I speak from a position of privilege when it comes to any kind of, you
[Guest]: know, educational protection, caste protection, so on and so forth. But I still want to unpack
[Guest]: this a little bit so that we see what the caste reservation system is doing, both to low caste
[Guest]: groups and upper caste groups. Now, if you think about reservations, think about it in terms of a
[Guest]: size of an existing pie out of which a few slices are pre-allotted to certain groups.
[Guest]: Now, most of these are admissions in educational institutions and reservations in government jobs.
[Guest]: That is really the core of what's going on. So what does this mean in terms of making caste
[Guest]: problems better or worse? Now, if you think of a certain society where the size of the pie is not
[Guest]: growing, such as a socialist society, you know, India with its Hindu rate of growth and so on and
[Guest]: so forth, if the pie is not growing, more and more people become extremely agitated and start
[Guest]: hating the idea of certain groups getting a few slices of the particular pie, right?
[Guest]: Now, what happens? Other groups also want that protection. They also want certain slices of the
[Guest]: pie completely reserved for them. Unfortunately, unless the size of the pie grows, each additional
[Guest]: group that gets that protection or a pre-allotted slice of the pie is going to reduce the allotment
[Guest]: of every other group, right? So if there are 20% of the seats pre-allotted to particular groups
[Guest]: and more groups want that protection, either we increase the 20% limit or you're encroaching from
[Guest]: other groups. Now, what is the problem with this? The problem is, originally, it started out as a
[Guest]: protection for the most historically oppressed castes and tribes. As the republic aged, we had
[Guest]: included more and more groups and now there are a lot of relatively upper caste groups that have
[Guest]: nothing to do with historical oppression that want the same reservation or protection allotted to
[Guest]: them, right? An example of this is the partidars or the kapus. They are not historically oppressed,
[Guest]: but they feel they have a grouse given the current system where they are educated, land-owning class,
[Guest]: but they can't find jobs. So they need some protection, which is government protection.
[Guest]: So what do they want? They want the existing number of government jobs to be re-allotted.
[Guest]: They want the lines redrawn so that they are included in it, right? Now, this causes a problem
[Guest]: with historically oppressed groups because they feel that there are new upper caste groups who
[Guest]: are encroaching on what was originally promised to them. This is a very big source of tension
[Guest]: in India. So the original classification of scheduled caste, scheduled tribes, and other
[Guest]: backward classes has more and more groups being included in it and more groups agitating to be
[Guest]: included in it almost on a daily basis. So you see Gujjar agitations, you see kapu agitations.
[Guest]: The most recent is the partidar agitation, which has taken a new political twist.
[Amit Varma]: There were Jats in Haryana, Marathas in Maharashtra and all the land-owning caste like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, because the size of the land with each generation shrinks. So now think about this.
[Guest]: You have a fixed size of the pie. More and more people want the protection because it gives you
[Guest]: a job without doing anything in the government. It promises you certain benefits, promotions,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. However, each additional group that gets included in the protection
[Guest]: means two things. Existing groups' protection is less valuable and sometimes just less because
[Guest]: the pie is not growing. And second is the general category, which is the erstwhile upper caste,
[Guest]: right? The non-oppressed groups, rather the oppressors, are not included in this protection
[Guest]: and many of them are poor. They're economically poor, even if they aren't socially poor.
[Guest]: So now there is new agitations where there is even more hatred or some sense of disagreement
[Guest]: between those caste groups and the new caste groups. If you notice, what is happening in India
[Guest]: is, before 1950, that is before reservations, I've heard these stories from great-grandparents
[Guest]: who just tend to be politically incorrect and extremely prejudiced, but they would talk about
[Guest]: certain caste groups as trying to mimic upper caste practices. That is, previously oppressed
[Guest]: groups were desperate to exit their situation, right? The Mahars are a great example of exiting
[Guest]: the parochial village structure and joining the British army. There were other groups all over
[Guest]: India which tried to exit that parochial structure and mimic up, right? I'm using these words in a
[Guest]: highly contextual way. They thought they were moving up in the social and the caste ladder.
[Guest]: Now, what you see in present-day India is the exact reverse of that. Someone who is born in
[Guest]: the lower caste or, you know, previously lower caste, schedule caste, schedule tribes,
[Guest]: they want to hold on to that. That identity means everything to them. That identity at the time of
[Guest]: birth, if they don't put it on their birth certificate, if they don't have the right last
[Guest]: name or they don't have the right social status, they don't have the right social status, they
[Guest]: or they don't have their community vouching for their caste, they're not going to get the
[Guest]: reservation protection, which means we want to hold on to that caste identity. How do you break
[Guest]: down caste? You need individuals to be incentivized to leave their caste identity. What we have done
[Guest]: is constitutionalize the problem. We have incentivized groups to hold on stronger than
[Guest]: ever before to that caste identity because that is what gets them the benefit. Okay. So now,
[Guest]: this is in no way taking away from the fact that Dalit groups have been oppressed and they may
[Guest]: feel that there is a particular rightly justified reason why they need greater social protection,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. I'm not arguing against how they feel about it. What I'm arguing against is
[Guest]: the Ambedkar idea. Ambedkar thought caste would disappear. How does caste disappear? Individuals
[Guest]: from different castes decide to shed their caste identity and move on to something else.
[Guest]: And the constitution disincentivizes you to do that. It incentivizes people to hold on to that
[Guest]: identity and hold on to that community. That I find extremely problematic, right? A liberal market
[Guest]: economy will make you want to shed your caste, change your name, move to a new place where
[Guest]: the parochial structure doesn't shackle you. What we're doing is the exact reverse of that.
[Guest]: Now, this is not to say that certain castes don't have an emotional attachment to their networks or
[Guest]: their community, that they don't have any respect for shared history. You may want to hold on to it
[Guest]: just because we've just seen a protest which started with a 200 year old battle, right? So,
[Guest]: there may be reasons, emotional reasons to hold on to a historical issue or your identity.
[Guest]: I'm not talking about those reasons. I'm talking about the practical economic reasons we have
[Guest]: managed to disincentivize people to exit their caste at birth, which I think is very, very
[Amit Varma]: problematic. And what I've always found perverse, just at a philosophical level, is that if we all
[Amit Varma]: agree, as we surely do, that discriminating on the basis of caste is wrong, what are reservations?
[Amit Varma]: They are discrimination on the basis of caste. They perpetuate the ill feeling between castes.
[Guest]: How can that be a solution? Well, the way we have reservations presently
[Guest]: is no solution at all. There are two big problems with it, and a lot of Dalit groups and Dalit
[Guest]: scholars also agree. The problem being that it's only the upper cream of Dalit groups who get the
[Guest]: benefits. To actually get access or protections from these reservations, you need to have completed
[Guest]: school, right? You need to go from K through 12, actually have your higher school certificate to
[Guest]: be able to sit for exams or to gain admissions in these elite institutions. Most of the parochial
[Guest]: village structure does not allow Dalit children to be educated properly. So what are we talking
[Guest]: about? We're now talking about Dalits who managed to exit the parochial system and who can actually
[Guest]: get the benefit as opposed to the people it was originally intended for. So let's also acknowledge
[Guest]: that there is now a division even within the historically oppressed groups and Dalit communities
[Guest]: where a certain portion of that group, which is already well off, is gaining a lot of those
[Guest]: benefits while the historically oppressed just remain oppressed for the various reasons that I
[Guest]: mentioned, which is the shackling of the physical capital, human capital, village system, so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. In fact, so the benefits of reservations even for Dalits really go to the privileged
[Guest]: outliers among the Dalits to begin with. Absolutely. There's a lot of constitutional
[Guest]: jurisprudence on this with respect to how do you treat the creamy layer, which is mainly the well
[Guest]: off layer of the group that's already received the privileges or the benefits amongst the other
[Guest]: backward castes. So there is a lot of politics and jurisprudence from the highest courts and
[Guest]: the Supreme Court on this matter. So this is not a new problem. We know that this problem exists.
[Guest]: So the first part of the reservation problem is it actually doesn't go to the people that it was
[Guest]: really intended to go to in terms of how Ambedkar thought about the problem. The other framers
[Guest]: supported this idea. The second part of it, as you mentioned, is it makes caste tensions worse
[Guest]: because it makes everyone hold on to an identity. And then there is only a certain fixed size of the
[Guest]: pie. Each group getting a little bigger or smaller size is going to take away from another group or
[Guest]: get to another group that causes a lot of tensions. And on this matter, the Dalit groups are
[Guest]: absolutely right in the sense that these reservations, whether you believe in them or not,
[Guest]: were introduced to uplift the historically oppressed. A lot of the groups asking for
[Guest]: these protections today are not historically oppressed. They are just oppressed in the
[Guest]: modern socialist system because they can't get jobs. That's their modern day oppression, right?
[Guest]: So there is a genuine reason for the kind of tensions that have bubbled up because the
[Guest]: original promises made to certain groups, whether you agree with them or not, have not been fulfilled.
[Amit Varma]: So before we move on from here, let me just try and sum up the four points you made so far and
[Amit Varma]: tell me if that's accurate. The first thing the government did wrong was in setting policies which
[Amit Varma]: reduced economic freedom and therefore, number one, it reduced mobility of resources. For example,
[Amit Varma]: you can't sell agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes and therefore you're
[Amit Varma]: trapped in that sense. Number two, it reduced mobility of labor because, you know, the labor
[Amit Varma]: laws meant that there was a very large informal sector and what there was of the formal sector,
[Amit Varma]: people would tend to choose from among their, you know, their relatives or their caste, therefore
[Amit Varma]: perpetuating the power imbalances that then existed. The third problem was that village
[Amit Varma]: governance structures were kept as they are constitutionally, so they weren't allowed to
[Amit Varma]: change even if the village grew bigger and could have become a town. And those imbalances, again,
[Amit Varma]: in those segregated villages were reflected and ossified within those panchayati raj structures.
[Amit Varma]: And the fourth point being that the system of reservations which was laid out with good
[Amit Varma]: intentions and championed early on by Ambedkar went wrong in a number of different ways. Number
[Amit Varma]: one, the benefits would tend to go to the already privileged people among the castes that they were
[Amit Varma]: supposed to go to, to begin with the most oppressed of the lot. Number two, they expanded
[Amit Varma]: to include various other castes and sub-castes. Number three, the pie remained fixed but the
[Amit Varma]: demand increased whereas the supply didn't and that led to greater conflict. And all of this
[Amit Varma]: conflict was framed in terms of caste identity, as castes which would earlier back in the day,
[Amit Varma]: they would mimic up, now began to mimic down because of the juicy lollipop of government jobs
[Amit Varma]: and government seats in educational institutions. And caste tensions actually became worse because
[Amit Varma]: of all this. Is that kind of accurate or have I left something out?
[Guest]: That's very accurate. I would just add an element to this which is at the core of it,
[Guest]: all four issues you've identified are incentive problems, right? We are disincentivizing groups
[Guest]: to leave the village. We are disincentivizing groups to convert certain types of physical
[Guest]: capital to other uses or human capital to other uses. And the biggest disincentive that we have
[Guest]: in the current system is the incentive for individuals and groups to shed their caste identity
[Guest]: to just completely destroy the caste system. We are actually doing the opposite. The incentive
[Guest]: is very much to protect their caste identity and to actually make the caste system stronger
[Guest]: just in a new political format, right? So I think at the core of all four issues, I want to highlight
[Guest]: it is an incentive problem. And that I think there's very little recognition of thinking about
[Amit Varma]: the caste problem in that sense. So my follow up question then there is that again, putting your
[Amit Varma]: economics hat on, what would you do about this? What is the way out of this terrible mess that we
[Guest]: are in? The first thing we need to do is acknowledge that outside any state intervention or state
[Guest]: exacerbation, people need to change. And the upper castes and elites in India have just been appalling
[Guest]: in the kind of prejudice and bigotry that they have displayed. So it's simple things, which are
[Guest]: actually very big things, like making sure that, you know, your household health can use your
[Guest]: restroom, or gets access to water, the same water sources you do, even though you live in a fancy,
[Guest]: you know, lovely urban flat in Delhi or Bombay. These problems persist, and there's no way out
[Guest]: of it except for people to change their minds and correct their behavior. So the question that
[Guest]: you're really asking is, what can the state do? Right? We know what people can do, they can become,
[Guest]: you know, better behaved. So what can the state do? So again, I would identify four areas where
[Guest]: state positive and negative action can, I think, improve the situation. And what I mean by improve
[Guest]: the situation is, there's nothing the state can really do to make the caste system go away.
[Guest]: What it can do is create better incentives, so that individuals organically leave a particularly
[Guest]: parochial system. So let me start with the first point. The first is that the state just needs to
[Guest]: get out of the way. When it comes to restrictions on physical and human capital, it needs to
[Guest]: liberalize the economy, and that liberalization must start at the lowest, most basic level at
[Guest]: the village, and then move up to labor law reforms, which are really more of an urban problem,
[Guest]: which also affect the village. So getting out of the way, that is removing or lifting restrictions
[Guest]: on agriculture, removing and lifting restrictions on hiring and firing of people in manufacturing
[Guest]: units, all those things the state can do, it should do. We know that the socialist,
[Guest]: licensing, restrictive economy is making the caste problem worse. So even though removing
[Guest]: those restrictions won't lead to the caste system going away overnight, it will not make it worse,
[Guest]: right? It will make it easier for people to exit a particular system. So that is the very first
[Guest]: thing. Now in this, Amit, you can add a laundry list of all the restrictions that need to be
[Guest]: removed. You've actually done a great job without talking about caste on the kind of restrictions
[Guest]: that need to be lifted in all your previous episodes. So you know, pick a bouquet of those
[Amit Varma]: restrictions. And that's the first thing to do. Basically anything that increases economic freedom
[Guest]: and thereby increases social mobility. Exactly, exactly. I couldn't have worded it better.
[Guest]: The second point is positive action on the part of the state. And by positive action, I mean,
[Guest]: the basic task of the state, which is to provide public goods and services. What are public goods?
[Guest]: It's things like sewage, roads, you know, any public amenities. So think about something like
[Guest]: sewage. Now sewage is a classic public good in the sense that there's a collective action problem
[Guest]: that needs to be overcome. Now think about sewage and the sewage system and the caste politics in
[Guest]: India. As you know, there are Dalit groups that were untouchable because they were segregated
[Guest]: into an occupation that we now politely call manual scavenging. Manual scavenging is essentially,
[Guest]: there were certain groups and this was their job by birth. They were supposed to come and clean out
[Guest]: the latrines of the upper caste homes. They were never allowed into the house. I mean, nowhere
[Guest]: close to the vicinity of the house. They had to come in through the back door, clean out those
[Guest]: latrines, pick up human excreta in their hands, put it on their head and walk to the next home,
[Guest]: do the same and then bury it somewhere in a landfill. There was a caste that was told to
[Guest]: do this job. It was oppressed. Now, because they dealt with human waste, the upper caste insisted
[Guest]: that they can't touch the water source and so on and so forth and they would contaminate it.
[Guest]: This obviously persisted, got worse, got more entrenched and they became untouchables,
[Guest]: not allowed to live in the village, had to live outside, but provided the most crucial service
[Guest]: that you need in a village environment. Now, think about how public goods provisioning can
[Guest]: make this problem better. So, I recently read a book, this is a bit of a tangent,
[Guest]: but it's crucial to this point, called Where India Goes. It's by Coffee, Diane Coffee and
[Guest]: Dean Spears. It's an excellent book. It basically talks about the open defecation problem in India
[Guest]: and it talks about how there are many countries that are poorer than India, but that don't
[Guest]: defecate in the open because actually latrines are not that difficult to build or access and
[Guest]: even low levels of income, one of the first few things people do in countries like Nigeria
[Guest]: is that they get access to a latrine. Now, in India, the government has been building latrines
[Guest]: for people and they won't use them. They use them as storage units, children's playgrounds,
[Guest]: washing areas. They don't use them for their given use. They actually go out in the open.
[Guest]: Why is that the case? It's because of caste and ritual purity. Upper caste will not clean out a
[Guest]: latrine with their own hands because these are not connected to a sewage system. So, it's not
[Guest]: like your bathroom and mine where we just flush and all the unpleasant stuff just goes away.
[Guest]: So, you need to manually pump out the latrine or clean it by hand and upper caste just refuse to
[Guest]: deal with human excretion, even their own and their own families, which means that they will
[Guest]: still continue to go out in the open, which means that now we are persisting a particular
[Guest]: occupation of manual scavenging. We made it bigger than ever before because of population growth.
[Guest]: In UP, this problem is worse than it was even 20-30 years ago because of the numbers that are
[Guest]: at play. And this group has to continue doing this job and it has no choice. And because it
[Guest]: deals with human filth, there is even greater oppression, even in modern day, when you have
[Guest]: every kind of hygiene access that you can possibly think of, except you don't have it in the
[Guest]: villages. So, the book I was talking about was talking about open defecation and how it's
[Guest]: increasing infant mortality and killing our children. But the part that I found interesting,
[Guest]: even though the book is not suggesting as this kind of magic bullet solution, the part that I
[Guest]: find interesting is upper castes will embrace toilets as long as it's connected to a sewage
[Guest]: system. They won't transition slowly from open defecation into latrines that need to be pumped
[Guest]: or cleaned manually into a sewage system. So, what does the government need to do? Instead of
[Guest]: giving subsidies through Swachh Bharat Abhiyan to have toilets everywhere and photo ops,
[Guest]: it needs to dig up towns and villages and provide the sewage system. That is very difficult to do.
[Guest]: It's not very profitable for anyone to do that. The benefits are very far in the future and all
[Guest]: the costs are today because you're going to dig up entire towns today. So, nobody wants to build
[Guest]: or increase the capacity of the sewage systems. So, in India, we have no functional sewage system
[Guest]: and despite economic growth, we continue to go out in the open and oppress castes into doing
[Guest]: terrible jobs and then treating them badly for doing those jobs well. So, this I would highlight
[Guest]: as an example of better public goods provisioning like sewage system, like water sources will
[Guest]: actually make the caste problem better. It will reduce segregation, it will actually improve the
[Guest]: lot of certain groups which are not just historically oppressed but also oppressed in present
[Amit Varma]: day. And the very fact that sewage systems haven't been made so far in such large parts of the
[Amit Varma]: country also have something to do with structures of local governance and the kind of incentives in
[Guest]: play. So, it's like a vicious circle that affects everything. Well, I don't think it's a vicious
[Guest]: circle in the sense that one perpetuates the other. I think it's a fundamental problem. If
[Guest]: you solve the fundamental problem, all the other problems will automatically start seeing solutions.
[Guest]: It's a constitutional problem of giving groups benefits but through reservations even at the
[Guest]: local governance level and not giving them responsibilities and revenue raising capacity.
[Guest]: I mean, there is a constitutional solution to all these problems. I don't think of it as a
[Guest]: vicious circle in that one problem perpetuates the next and then it comes back to the beginning.
[Amit Varma]: I meant it as a vicious circle in the sense that our structures of local governance are
[Amit Varma]: deeply flawed and yet the only people who can actually do something about it are those
[Guest]: who benefit from them. So, how do you get past that? Oh, absolutely. There I do agree with you.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, it's very difficult to get past that. The sewage system is a particularly sticky public
[Guest]: choice problem because all the benefits are dispersed which is everyone will benefit from
[Guest]: a better sewage system. All the costs are concentrated which means your existing
[Guest]: corporator or the panchayati raj powers that be will bear the cost because everyone abuses
[Guest]: government when they dig everything up, right? It takes years to build a functional sewage system.
[Guest]: We know that. So, everyone's abusing people when they're digging up and imposing costs in the
[Guest]: present. The benefits are far in the future and extremely dispersed. So, there is a fundamental
[Guest]: public choice problem that needs to be overcome. I would actually applaud the prime minister if
[Guest]: his Swachh Bharat Abhiyan meant actually building a sewage network underground as opposed to just
[Guest]: building a shed with a manual factory. That's what's happening right now. But that doesn't
[Amit Varma]: give opportunity for so many photo ops. So, you know, what do you do? Well, I don't want to talk
[Guest]: about his incentives so much. It could just be that there are certain people who haven't thought
[Guest]: about the problem from a caste lens, right? So, giving everyone the benefit of the doubt and
[Guest]: let's assume that they have the best of intentions. We know that latrines don't solve the problem in
[Guest]: India without a sewage system connected to it because we have a horrific caste system
[Guest]: that is attached to this problem in the villages that just refuses to go away. It's persisting.
[Guest]: We talked about why it's persisting. It's not going to disappear when it comes to personal
[Guest]: hygiene and Swachh Bharat, right? So, if it persists in all other aspects of life,
[Guest]: it's persisting here. So, if we want to solve the problem, we need to deal with the caste
[Guest]: aspect of the problem. And even though I don't condone all this ritual purity nonsense of the
[Guest]: upper caste, we've got to acknowledge that it exists and find a good policy solution around it
[Guest]: so that we can improve on two factors. One is infant mortality and the second is remove
[Guest]: oppression of untouchable groups that are still present day treated as untouchables
[Guest]: because they do very important functions that are considered menial and filthy and impure.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. If you can't change their mindset, build them a sewage system.
[Amit Varma]: What's your next point on what the government can do?
[Guest]: So, the first part was get out of the way. The second is actually do your job,
[Guest]: right? Build public goods and services that you were supposed to build.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The third one, I want to go a little bit out on a limb here.
[Guest]: Now, if you remember when we were talking about the problems of the village system,
[Guest]: we talked about how the village system is highly segregated and this segregation extends depending
[Guest]: on how bad or awful the village is or how bad the caste problem is. It extends from land use
[Guest]: to water use to schooling. So, let's say it's a relatively small village and there are only one
[Guest]: or two schools in that village, right? Government schools at the moment and they cater to about 50
[Guest]: students each. If there's only one school in the village because of caste problems,
[Guest]: lower caste children are forced to sit outside or forced to sit on the floor,
[Guest]: not given access to water. The young girls are not allowed to use the same restrooms as
[Guest]: the other girls of upper caste. So, there's a personal hygiene issue.
[Guest]: These are really big problems. We want to make it easier for children to attend school,
[Guest]: not make it harder. One part of the easier is, you know, right to education and all the
[Guest]: good intentions of providing free education compulsory, blah, blah, blah. The other part
[Guest]: of it is removing all the everyday roadblocks. I mean, a baker is an exceptional human being
[Guest]: who was able to get through that kind of caste prejudice and still managed to get an education.
[Guest]: Most students might give up. Most parents of young girls may not send their daughters to school
[Guest]: if they can't get access to a restroom post-puberty. These are really basic,
[Guest]: important problems that we have not found a solution for. So, the third suggestion I'm
[Guest]: going to give is the school voucher system. Now, this benefits everybody, but I think it will
[Guest]: really empower historically oppressed groups, especially at the village and small town level.
[Guest]: What a voucher system does is it empowers the parent and the student as opposed to the school.
[Guest]: Now, think about a village structure. The school is going to reflect the power structure of the
[Guest]: village. And we know that the historically educated castes are all upper caste. Not to say you can't
[Guest]: have a Dalit school teacher. We have many, many, many excellent Dalit school teachers. But there
[Guest]: is the same hegemonic structure in the rest of the village will partially limit itself at school.
[Guest]: What does that mean? It means if a school is run by awful upper caste elites who oppress lower
[Guest]: castes, lower castes are less likely to go down. What is the exit option? None. So, the school
[Guest]: voucher system can actually give these students an exit option. If you don't like the fact that
[Guest]: a particular school will not allow you to use the restroom, or the peon will pour water from four
[Guest]: feet above, or you can't share the same water jug as your upper caste classmates, you can exit the
[Guest]: system. The voucher system will empower the poorest, most oppressed groups by giving them
[Guest]: the ability to vote with their feet. We don't have that ability right now. So, even though I
[Guest]: think we should introduce a school voucher system everywhere, right, not just to solve caste
[Guest]: problems in India. This is a problem in urban areas. It's a problem in the United States.
[Guest]: So, even though I think the voucher system actually has a lot of benefits in terms of
[Guest]: educational outcomes, it empowers students and parents instead of teachers unions,
[Guest]: I think it will have a particularly big impact on solving the caste problem or at least mitigating
[Guest]: it. Because most low caste students are not able to get an education that will even help them get
[Guest]: the reserved jobs. The only way to provide that education is through better schooling,
[Guest]: which at present is private schooling or competitive public schooling. That situation
[Amit Varma]: is solved only by a voucher system, no other. And, you know, I've been writing about school
[Amit Varma]: vouchers for almost 15 years, as you know, and this is the first time I've actually thought
[Amit Varma]: about it in the context of caste. You always think about it in the context of economics or
[Amit Varma]: education or whatever. But, you know, here it is, could play a part in making society function
[Guest]: better. I don't think, I've read all your pieces on school voucher system and I don't think what
[Guest]: you're saying is tangential or contradictory to the caste problem. It's just that the caste
[Guest]: problem is the core of the problem as it drops people of choices and makes exit very difficult.
[Guest]: Right? School voucher solves both of those problems. So it's going to solve those problems,
[Guest]: whether there's a caste problem or not. If there is a caste problem, it is even more empowering.
[Guest]: I don't think, I think it fits very well with what you've been working on.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. I mean, school vouchers empower parents with choice and any kind of empowerment,
[Amit Varma]: obviously applies to everybody. What's your fourth point on what the government could do?
[Guest]: The fourth point is the hardest to solve and it can't be solved. The fourth point is that this
[Guest]: kind of constitutionalization of caste needs to go. So part of it was done by the Mandal judgment,
[Guest]: which just in brief, what that particular Supreme Court judgment did was it said, look,
[Guest]: there are various castes, which are all lobbying for different kinds of benefits,
[Guest]: you know, with good and bad reasons. Some were genuinely historically expressed. Some are new
[Guest]: groups that are trying to get these benefits. However, all reservation must be capped at 49.5%.
[Guest]: So there was a particular number which came to 22.5% for scheduled caste and scheduled tribes,
[Guest]: and then 27% for other backward classes. It needs to stop at 49.5%. There will be no more.
[Guest]: Now, this is really interesting. This was already, the Mandal judgment read in more than what the
[Guest]: original constitution said. The constitution never gave a certain number and it never imposed
[Guest]: a particular limit, right? It just told you what groups and what percentages. So what the Mandal
[Guest]: judgment did is both expanded the reservation policy and at the same time constrained the
[Guest]: government by capping it at 49.5%. Now, what has happened since the Mandal judgment?
[Guest]: More and more groups want to be included. They understand that if they are included
[Guest]: within the 49.5%, they're going to rob other groups of their privileges. So what are they
[Guest]: trying to do? In every state, there is a group lobbying to get an exemption to the Mandal
[Guest]: situation by adding their particular reservation policy in a particular constitutional framework
[Guest]: called the 9th Schedule. The 9th Schedule, just again very briefly, provides a constitutional
[Guest]: vehicle to protect the laws from judicial review, even if it violates the fundamental rights chapter
[Guest]: of the constitution. So what that means is, if you want an exception from any of the fundamental
[Guest]: rights currently at work, and you usually want an exception because a court has shuttled down,
[Guest]: you use the 9th Schedule. I wrote about this extensively for your magazine and
[Guest]: Pravati on land reform issues. One interesting thing about the 9th Schedule vehicle is that
[Guest]: reservation policy had made an appearance in it. So Tamil Nadu law, the reservation policy
[Guest]: completely goes well above 49.5%. I think it went to 69% in the first shot and then
[Guest]: somewhere in the 80s after that. So they got an exemption to Tamil Nadu law by adding it to the
[Guest]: 9th Schedule. If you read the newspaper and do a quick search for the 9th Schedule, what you will
[Guest]: observe is groups like Paridhar, Sapos, Gujarat, Jats, not Gujarat, I think just Jats and Haryana,
[Guest]: each one of them is lobbying for legislation to be passed that they know is unconstitutional
[Guest]: in the current framework and then lobbying that their state government lobbies the central
[Guest]: government to add these to the 9th Schedule using a constitutional amendment to increase
[Guest]: the reservation in their state above 49.5%. So what we have done in this complicated story is
[Guest]: we have constitutionalized caste. Even when the court says it's unconstitutional,
[Guest]: there is a way around the problem. It is to keep fixing and tweaking the rules and the limits.
[Guest]: The way the current problem is being solved is if there is a group which becomes a vote bank by
[Guest]: unifying like the Paridhars or the Kapus, they unify, they agitate together, they form a vote
[Guest]: bank, they try to lobby and get what they want through the caste reservation system.
[Guest]: So this is a really big problem. Now when I say this needs to go, I unfortunately don't have a
[Guest]: good solution for it. You know, you know a lot of public choice so you know that there's this
[Guest]: problem of the transitional gains trap which is we all know that exiting the existing system and
[Guest]: going to the new system will be more efficient but making that transition is going to create some
[Guest]: winners and losers. All the losers in that transitional system are going to do their best
[Guest]: to hold on to their privileges. In fact, given the nature of our democracy and the fact that all our
[Amit Varma]: politics is essentially identity politics, this is again a vicious circle. It's pretty much
[Guest]: impossible to solve. This is very difficult to solve and I think the only way around it, I don't
[Guest]: want to be, I don't want to keep sounding like this free market messiah but liberalizing the
[Guest]: economy is the only way. We need to create job opportunities for these groups which are actually
[Guest]: better than what the government is promising. That is the only way to get out of this trap.
[Guest]: Now there's very little incentive for politicians to do that because how else
[Guest]: will they get their votes, right? You want to keep the people uneducated and oppressed so that you
[Guest]: can promise them benefits. So there's a disincentive for politicians to fix this problem
[Guest]: but liberalizing the economy and creating more jobs is pretty much the only way to go.
[Guest]: We've seen that not liberalizing the economy is actually making the problem worse, right? Upper
[Guest]: class groups now want protections. So where do you go from there? So the only way around this
[Guest]: problem is to create jobs that are better than the reserved ones, right? Like the one you have or the
[Guest]: one I have. We have exited the system to a better opportunity. We're not actually looking for the
[Guest]: existing opportunity. I completely acknowledge that we're a privileged lot but we need to find
[Guest]: a market system that offers everyone those privileges and protections. The only way to do
[Guest]: that is to create a larger pie that everyone can share in and the only way to do that is economic
[Amit Varma]: growth through liberalization. I couldn't agree with you more. I think if we empower enough
[Amit Varma]: individuals and change their incentives to think beyond the caste system then the incentives for
[Amit Varma]: politicians in the political marketplace also change. That's really, that's our only hope in
[Amit Varma]: the long term. Shruti, thanks so much for your time. I've learned a lot today. It was great
[Guest]: having you on the show. Thanks, Amit. It's always great fun speaking with you.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed this show, head on over to sceneunseen.in for all previous episodes of
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen which include a few with Shruti as my guest. You can follow Shruti on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter at srajgopalan and you can follow me at amitvarma. This podcast is produced in
[Amit Varma]: partnership with IVM Podcast and I'd encourage you to check out more podcasts by them by
[Amit Varma]: downloading the IVM Podcast app or by following them on Twitter and FB. See you next week.
[Unknown]: There she stands, a podcast addict. Outside the bank, having travelled several miles to get in
[Unknown]: with other poor souls like her. The journey, though daunting for this youngling, will have
[Unknown]: some comfort because she has downloaded her favourite podcast. You can see more of her
[Unknown]: species on ivmpodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check out the
[Unknown]: coolest Indian podcasts. Happy listening.